.fp 5 CW
.TH STK 3
.SH NAME
\fBstk\fR \- data stack storage library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta .75i 1.5i 2.25i 3i 3.75i 4.5i 5.25i 6i
.de Ss
.fl
.ne 3
.SS "\\$1"
..
.PP
.nf
\f3
#include <stk.h>

Stk_t *stkopen(int \fIflags\fP);
void stkoverflow(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP, void *(\fIoverflow\fP)(size_t));
Stk_t *stkinstall(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP, char *(\fIoverflow\fP)(size_t));
int stkclose(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP);
unsigned int stklink(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP)

void *stkalloc(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP, unsigned \fIsize\fP);
char *stkcopy(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP, const char *\fIstring\fP);
void *stkset(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP, void *\fIaddress\fP, unsigned \fIoffset\fP);

void *stkseek(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP, unsigned \fIoffset\fP);
int stktell(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP);
char *stkptr(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP, unsigned \fIoffset\fP);
void *stkfreeze(Stk_t *\fIstack\fP, unsigned \fIextra\fP);
int stkon(Stk *\fIstack\fP, char* \fIaddr\fP)
\fR
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\f3stk\fP is a package of routines designed to provide efficient
stack oriented dynamic storage.
A stack abstraction consists of an ordered list of contiguous
memory regions, called stack frames, that can hold objects of
arbitrary size.
A stack is represented by the type \f3Stk_t\fP
defined in the header \f3<stk.h>\fP.
The type \f3Stk_t\fP is compatible with the type \f3Sfio_t\fP
defined by the \f3sfio\fP(3) library.
There is a preset initial stack which can be referenced
by the constant \f3stkstd\fP (stack standard).
.PP
Objects of variable size can be
added to a stack,
and programs can reference these objects directly with pointers.
In addition, the last object on the stack
(referred to here as the current object)
can be built incrementally.
The current object has an associated offset that determines its
current size.
While the current object is being built incrementally,
its location might
change so that it is necessary to reference the object with
relative offsets ranging from zero to the current offset of the object.
.PP
The \f3sfio\fP(3) output functions can be used to build
the current object incrementally.
An object that is built incrementally on the stack will
always occupy contiguous memory within a stack frame,
but until \f3stkfreeze\fP() is called,
the location in memory for the object can change.
There is a current offset associated with the current object that
determines where subsequent operations apply.
Initially, this offset is zero, and the offset changes as a result
of the operations you specify.
.Ss "Descriptions of the functions"
.PP
The \f3stkopen\fP() function creates a new stack.
The \fIflags\fP argument is an options bitmask.
If the \f3STK_SMALL\fP bit is set, the stack allocates memory in
small blocks, optimizing memory usage at the expense of performance.
If the \f3STK_NULL\fP bit is set, a stack overflow will cause stack
operations to return a null pointer instead of throwing an exception.
If the \f3STK_NULL\fP bit is not set and the \f3stkstd\fP stack has
a custom overflow function set (see \f3stkoverflow\fP() below),
then the new stack inherits the pointer to that overflow function.
If successful,
\f3stkopen\fP() returns a pointer to a stack whose reference
count is 1.
Otherwise, \f3stkopen\fP() returns a null pointer.
.PP
The \f3stkoverflow\fP() function specifies a function that will
be called whenever \f3malloc\fP(3) fails while trying to grow the
stack.
The \fIoverflow\fP function will be called with the size that was passed
to \f3malloc\fP(3).
The \fIoverflow\fP function can call \f3exit\fP(3), call \f3longjmp\fP(3)
or return.
If the \f2overflow\fP function returns,
it must return a pointer to a memory region of the given size.
If \f2overflow\fP is \f3NULL\fP, then the stack overflow action
is reset to the default.
If the stack was opened with the \f3STK_NULL\fP option,
the default is to return a null pointer,
otherwise the default is to write an error to standard error and to
call \f3exit\fP(2) with a non-zero exit value.
.PP
The \f3stkinstall\fP() function
is deprecated and provided for backward compatibility.
\f3stkinstall\fP() makes \f3stkstd\fP refer to the specified \fIstack\fP pointer
and returns a pointer to the previous \f3stkstd\fP stack.
If the \fIoverflow\fP argument is not null and the stack was not opened with
the \f3STK_NULL\fP option, then \fIoverflow\fP sets the overflow action
(see \f3overflow\fP() above).
When \fIstack\fP is a null pointer,
the \f3stkstd\fP stack is not changed
but the \fIoverflow\fP function for the \f3stkstd\fP stack can be changed
and a pointer to the \f3stkstd\fP stack is returned.
(Current usage is simply
passing the pointer to the desired stack to the \f3stk\fP functions,
and using \f3stkoverflow\fP() to set the stack overflow function).
.PP
The \f3stkclose\fP() function decrements the reference count and
frees the memory associated with
the specified stack
when the reference count is zero.
The effect of subsequent references to objects
on the stack is undefined.
.PP
The \f3stklink\fP() function increases the reference count for the
given \fIstack\fP and returns the increased count.
.PP
The
\f3stkalloc\fP() function returns an aligned pointer to space on the
active stack that can be used to hold any object of the given \fIsize\fP.
\f3stkalloc\fP() is similar to \f3malloc\fP(3) except that individual
items returned by \f3stkalloc\fP() can not be freed.
\f3stkalloc\fP() causes the offset of the current object to be set to
zero.
.PP
The
\f3stkcopy\fP() function copies the given string onto the stack
and returns a pointer to the \fIstring\fP on the stack.
\f3stkcopy\fP() causes the offset of the current object to be set to
zero.
.PP
The \f3stkset\fP() function finds the frame containing the given
\fIaddress\fP, frees all frames that were created after the one containing
the given \fIaddress\fP, and sets the current object to the given
\fIaddress\fP.
The top of the current object is set to \fIoffset\fP bytes from
current object.
If \fIaddress\fP is null, the stack is reset to the beginning.
If it is non-null, but is not the address of an object on the
stack, the program aborts and dumps core.
.PP
The \f3stkseek\fP() function is used set the offset for the
current object.
The \fIoffset\fP argument to \f3stkseek\fP() specifies the new
offset for the current object.
The frame will be extended or moved
if \f3offset\fP causes the new current offset to extend beyond the
current frame.
\f3stkseek\fP() returns a pointer to the beginning of the current object.
.PP
The \f3stktell\fP() function gives the offset of the current object.
.PP
The \f3stkptr\fP() function converts the given \f3offset\fP
for the current object into a memory address on the stack.
This address is only valid until another stack operation is given.
The result is not defined if \fIoffset\fP exceeds the size of the current
object.
This function returns a \f3char\fP pointer instead of \f3void\fP pointer
to make it easy to dereference the return value directly and read
an individual byte on the stack.
.PP
The \f3stkfreeze\fP()
function terminates the current object on the
stack and returns a pointer to the beginning of this object.
If \fIextra\fP is non-zero, \fIextra\fP bytes are added to the stack
before the current object is terminated.  The first added byte will
contain zero and the contents of the remaining bytes are undefined.
.PP
The \f3stkon\fP()
function returns non-zero if the address given by \fIaddr\fP is
on the stack \fIstack\fP and \f30\fP otherwise.
.SH HISTORY
The
\f3stk\fP
interface was derived from similar routines in the KornShell code
that is used for building parse trees and carrying out expansions.
It provides an efficient mechanism for grouping dynamically allocated
objects so that they can be freed all at once rather than individually.
.PP
In 2024, as part of changes made by
Martijn Dekker <martijn@inlv.org> for ksh 93u+m,
the return types of \f3stkalloc\fP(), \f3stkset\fP(), \f3stkseek\fP() and
\f3stkfreeze\fP() were changed from \f3char*\fP to \f3void*\fP,
the \f3stkoverflow\fP() function was added,
and the \f3stkinstall\fP() function was deprecated.
.SH AUTHOR
David Korn
.SH SEE ALSO
\f3exit\fP(2),
\f3longjmp\fP(3),
\f3malloc\fP(3),
\f3sfio\fP(3)
